# Engineering is an open field, not a paved road
In engineering, straight lines are few and far between. There is no certain path, no strict guide, no singular right way for every task. There are lots of wrong ways, for sure (being dismissive of others’ hard work, excluding underrepresented or underprivileged folks, stealing ideas and claiming them as your own for a few examples). More often than not it’s hard to know you’re “doing things right” until you look back. It took me a while to understand how my career led me to joining a Systems Engineering team in particular, because so much of this doubt clouded my career path early on. If you’re thinking of making a similar transition, I’d love to see you take a chance in exploring a new facet in the tech world.

Everyone has their own flavor of falling into engineering. Sometimes it’s sitting next to just the right person to peek over their shoulder as they work. Maybe you have a mom who was really into hardware hacking, passing that same love for electronics over to you as you grew up. A lot of the time it could be “part of the job” - you needed to pay the bills or they trained you to write scripts so you could automate some of the more mundane tasks along the way. All are valid and don’t let anyone tell you otherwise.

I grew up with a hobby centric mindset as my approach into software development. HTML in AOL Pages and writing a blackjack game in BASIC were my gateway drugs, back in the 90’s when it was just starting to become widely accessible to geeks in non-geek families. I had enough knowledge to be dangerous but not enough confidence to push past the fear of failure, even through college. I had a similar reluctance through the first few years of my professional career, a hesitation of parts of the stack that “weren’t for me”. Unless someone asked, I didn’t cross the line.
# Taking a bigger step
Often as engineers, we tend to wait for someone to tell us what we can and can’t do. We hesitate to apply for senior roles because we haven’t been called “senior” in a title yet. We hold back on ideas in meetings or questions during architecture reviews worrying that they’re obvious or even stupid (spoiler: they’re not). We don’t question previous design decisions because we assume when it was first built it must have been right and must continue to be right. All of these are intertwined with the fear of being less, doing less, or appearing less in the eyes of those assumed to be smarter or simply more talented than us.

Nothing could be further from the truth.

I don’t believe in an intrinsic trait that breeds systems engineers, or engineers at all for that matter. People are not born and bred for this. Sure, there are folks who are naturally drawn to it and find their mark early in admin work or building distributed systems. That said, no one has database administration in their DNA. There isn’t a gene marker for admins. Noble blood lines delineating who can and can’t be an SRE don’t exist. The field is open to anyone interested, and if you hear someone say differently, they’re only displaying to the world their own insecurities.

Hand in hand with this falsehood is the belief that systems engineering is “harder” than other parts of the stack. Many engineers, myself included, started out building products on the front end typically because the feedback loop is shorter and perhaps arguably more tangible. We convince ourselves that backend work is beyond us because it departs from our comfort zone. Letting go of this self doubt in what you’re capable of opens up a ton of opportunities.
# Why join Systems Engineering?
Many of the reasons for which you might have found yourself joining Product Engineering have parallels in Systems Engineering, avenues you might not realize exist. We’re problem solvers and builders, investigators and collaborators. We want to create and to improve, expanding our knowledge of our craft both for ourselves and for others directly and indirectly. If you feel this itch but worry “well, I’m just going to be setting up machines and never coding, right?”, let me allay those fears now. There are a ton of reasons to try your hand here.
## Because you care
First and foremost, you care. You’re in this industry because you want to to build products that will be impactful, tools that improve someone’s daily lives or entertain audiences, maybe even save some lives in the process. Systems Engineers deeply believe in that too, just with a small shift in the focus of said audience. People have problems that need solving, ones that you want to put your energy into helping them overcome.

Empathy should be at the core of everything we do in engineering, regardless of role or position in the company. Typically when building a frontend app, your audience consists of folks external to your org. You might meet a few people who say “Oh, you work at X? I love that and use it every day!” which is a great ego boost knowing you’re making people’s lives better. How great is it to get that same feedback from your friends and coworkers? Combining your knowledge of the needs of your frontend with the functional knowledge of what can be done via the backend can make you an important asset to any technical organization. You get do so at a very personal level, one in which you can directly ask your consumers “how can I help?”.
## You have a passion for understanding
You’re not content in making assumptions about your stack and you’re voracious in your consumption of material to learn. One of my favorite interview questions is simple in its ask and incredibly deep in its answers: "What happens when you type google.com in your browser and hit enter?”. If you’ve ever walked through that, you’ll realize just how far the branching pathways extend in various directions.
* Well, something has to interpret a domain name into an IP address, but I’ve always handwaved that (something something DNS). But how does DNS actually work?
* Is it just one host machine somewhere though? Most likely not. How would a site that takes tens, hundreds, thousands of requests a second scale?
* Hrm, what if I’m logged in - there has to be datastore requests for information relevant to my account to fetch. How do we reliably read and write to that, and how does it change for read or write heavy applications?
* How are all of those concurrent requests being spread out? Is there a caching layer in front of them to reduce some of that load?
* What happens when one machine, multiple machines, all of them, fail in a localized zone?
* How do I know which static asset versions I should be serving?
* What’s our deployment strategy for making updates to the site?
* Is there any kind of security for accessing this site - a cert to confirm I’m visiting the correct site and not being hit by a man in the middle attack? Why should I use TLS over SSL?

And this is all just scratching the barest surface for these and many more questions. If you’re passionate about the learning aspect of engineering, you can see how extending yourself further down into the stack gives you near limitless opportunities to grow as an engineer. When you see companies asking for full stack engineers, it’s folks who are asking these questions and more when presented with a new or unknown architecture.

Sometimes it’s fun just to be the smart engineer who knows a ton of stuff, too. This goes a bit beyond the scope of this post, but there’s a distinct push and pull between doing great work you’re proud of while maintaining the humility that you can’t know everything. You certainly don’t want to be the know-it-all jerk who spouts pedantic trivia (think “well, actually…”), but it’s exciting to be the conduit between teams who can answer a ton of questions. Helping people out can create a strong positive feedback loop for feeling valuable in what you do.

In short, systems engineering can be an opportunity to bust through silos and open up some black boxes. See what assumptions you hold that you can break. There’s nothing magical inside, and yet your colleagues will think you’re a wizard with how much you know!
## Pushing back against Defensive Attribution Hypothesis
Defensive Attribution Hypothesis is a cognitive bias that involves the disassociation in the thinking, understanding, and skills of others with those of your own in the face of failure. That blameful feeling you get when something goes awry and you want to point fingers at “those engineers over there”? That comes part and parcel with this. We tend to see failure external to ourselves and mentally push it away further, creating a gulf between perceived success and failure. If failure is way over there, then I must be successful over here. Of course in doing so, you’re also pushing understanding of the situation - and people - away.

The classic example of this is the devs vs. ops mentality. A deploy goes out to production. Shortly after, the site experiences an outage. You can imagine exactly what happens next. The developers cry foul, saying “the code was working in our dev environment, so production must not be set up correctly!”. The ops team says “of course it’s set up correctly, the site was working fine up until that deploy so it must be your change that broke everything. Why didn’t you test it more?”. There’s no insight here, no learning from what happened.

Now, imagine you have experience in both product engineering and systems engineering. You understand what time pressures devs are under to accomplish goals and the purpose of the app. They don’t want to break production, but they’re trying to hit their targets for the latest sprint. Likewise, you know what load the backend can handle and what’s required to scale it further. You know metrics like the requests per second your systems are currently under and how the architecture would need to be scaled up should those numbers change. You can see both sides of the situation.

As an example, let’s say your product team is launching a feature that adds a new query to the database. They build it in dev and it’s reading/writing as expected, but under much reduced load. They followed protocol, putting in the change request to the DBA’s and setting up an index for this query. They’re being proactive! Likewise, your DBA’s gain confidence in the deploy because of this request. The devs are testing it and they wouldn’t have asked for the index addition if they weren’t being careful, so they give the thumbs up. The deploy hits prod and things go south, with both sides believing they had done their due diligence and the other is to blame. A lack of perspective promotes conflict. Now let’s add you to this equation, with your prowess in multiple parts of the stack. You see a code review for this pop into your inbox and think:
* Perhaps this query could be cached for more availability, since it’s fairly read heavy and can hold up to a bit of staleness without adversely affecting what the app is trying to accomplish
* Maybe you can reduce the number of columns fetched and use a covering query, because you know what is and isn’t needed for the app
* To give some confidence to future deploys in general, you could set up a canary cluster for the devs to rely on so that they could see the performance of their code changes before it affects end users

Your knowledge of multiple domains lets you assume best of intentions for all parties involved because you can understand where both parties are coming from and empathize with the requirements they face.
# What’s next?
So you’re ready to try your hand at systems engineering be it general ops, database admin, networking, etc., but it’s super intimidating to jump in. You have experience with dev work in some form but the divide looks too far to take in one stride. You need to start fresh in a number of areas, which means in a lot of ways you might feel like you’re starting over. Fortunately, there are lots of ways you can ease into the waters without too much disruption. How do you get from here to there?
## Temp rotations with your local ops/backend team
Ask your manager if you can do a short term rotation with your company’s ops team. That tool that everyone wants built but no one has time to get to? This is a great opportunity for both you and your teammates to make it happen. With some coordination, you can be everyone’s favorite engineer putting it together while gaining some real world experience. Likewise, if there are tickets in your Jira, Trello, or other respective task board, see if you can snag one or two that look like low hanging fruit. Your admin friends will be grateful for your help in chopping away at the queue and hopefully can extend some of their domain knowledge to level you up in the process. Everyone wins!
## Attend new-to-you meetups, conferences, and meetings
Rotations can be a tall order for some companies, though, and not every org’s roadmap allows for a multi-week trip digression. If your company will sponsor you to go to conferences you might not normally attend, that’s an excellent resource for a longer term investment. Setting up smaller sessions internally within your org to spread domain knowledge as well (demos and “lunch and learns” are two great vehicles for this!) can be immensely useful. This can simultaneously help to break engineers free of being single points of failure for maintaining subsystems and can inform a large swath of folks. Local meetups in your area? Jump on those too! If you’re feeling a bit timid, though, grab a friend to go with, as partnering up can also help the feedback loop for answering questions and stimulating ideas. Sharing information and learning as a team can make those intimidating questions become trivial quickly.
## Daily tips and tricks
Impostor syndrome can really hit home when you’re making a large shift like this. Trying to gearshift when you’ve focused so heavily on one vertical in tech is really daunting. DNS? Filesystems? Database integrity? There’s so many paths to choose and each goes so deep. With so many people who have deep concentrations of knowledge it can be intimidating to try to “catch up”.


There’s no need to try to boil the ocean learning all of this in one day. You’re in no rush and you’ve got lots of time in your career no matter where you are looking to pick up skills. You’d probably be surprised at how much you’ve learned in a short time - unless you’re writing out your achievements as they come (and you should! It’s another great way to fight impostor syndrome). There’s a quote attributed to Bill Gates: “Most people overestimate what they can do in one year and underestimate what they can do in ten years.”. We try to do so much in the immediate, but set up a long term plan and you can move mountains. Try working on smaller bite sized projects, courses, and reading that’ll move you along your path.

Here are a few ways to get inspired if you’re looking to attack this problem on multiple fronts:
* Subscribe to twitter feeds that offer daily tips or regularly contribute to learning. Some of my favorites: Julia Evans ([@bork](https://twitter.com/b0rk)), Command Line Magic ([@climagic](https://twitter.com/climagic)), and of course SysAdvent in December ([@SysAdvent](https://twitter.com/sysadvent))
* Some of your favorite sites have great tech blogs - [Kickstarter](https://kickstarter.engineering/), Yelp, Netflix, and Etsy
* Subscribe to mailing lists and newsletters with articles that arrive in your mailbox - Devops Weekly, SysAdmin Casts, Monitoring Weekly, SRE Weekly
* Add some tech podcasts or screencasts to your commute - Arrested DevOps, CodeNewbie Podcast, SysAdmincasts, Devops Cafe
* If your company is doing demo days, sit in on some for other teams you don’t typically collaborate with.
* Likewise, hack weeks hosted by your company can bubble up great ideas and inspire you to venture into new parts of the stack with guidance from their owners.
* Start a tech book club at your company reading over a chapter every week or two. Learning can be even more effective when you’re sharing ideas with other like minded folks.
## Looking just over the horizon
Finally, you can look to parts of the stack adjacent to your comfort zone as a direction into systems engineering. If your strengths lie in mobile app building, ask yourself what might that API architecture it interacts with look like. If you need to set up a datastore call, investigate how you might profile and optimize that query to utilize indexes or set up caching around it. If you’re writing views and controllers in your favorite language (say, php), take a look behind the curtain to see how a dependency management tool, like composer, might be installing packages in various environments.

Picking up new skills doesn’t have to feel like being air dropped into the middle of nowhere. There’s something novel for sure about learning about tools that may be wholly different from where your current strengths lie, but easing into it with tech bordering what you’re comfortable with can smooth that transition. Checking out “over the horizon” tech to see what’s near to what you know but still new can help broaden your skillsets while leaving you with a starting point to build from in your mental model. 
# Bundling this up
For those of you thinking about a transition to systems engineering work, I can attest from personal experience how rewarding it can be. By opening yourself up, you can be a powerful force for good in your company, one with high adaptability and a wide breadth of scope for promoting positive change. Understanding this can afford you exciting work to be a part of and new challenges to spur your career moving forward. It’s a big step into uncharted territory, but one that can be deeply satisfying.

If you’re restricting yourself to familiar comfort zones or if you have a tendency towards vertical over horizontal learning, make this an opportunity to surprise yourself. There’s no rush - you’re not falling behind by exploring other parts of the stack. The best engineers in the industry have made it because they understand that failure is a necessary risk to achieve personal growth. Yes, you’re going to trip and fall. You did the same getting into engineering in the first place! Trust that you’ll eventually land on your feet and be all the better for it in the end.
